- In 1901,
this ancient Greek artifact
was discovered in a shipwreck
of the island of Antikythera.
3D x-ray scans have revealed
it contains 37 interlocking bronze gears,
allowing it to model the
motions of the sun and moon,
and predict eclipses decades in advance.
Constructed around 100 or 200 BC,
the Antikythera mechanism
represents a sophisticated early computer.
The likes of which would not be seen again
for at least a thousand years.
Now, of course,
this computer didn't work
like modern digital computers.
It works by analogy.
The gears were constructed in such a way
that the motions of certain dials
are analogous to the
motion of the sun and moon.
It is an analog computer.
- Here is a simple analog computer
for adding two numbers together.
If you turn the black wheel some amount
and then turn this white
wheel a different amount,
the gray wheel shows the
sum of the two rotations.
In contrast, this is a
digital mechanical computer
where you can add two single bit numbers.
So zero plus zero equals zero.
Zero plus one equals one.
And one plus one equals two.
These two devices
illustrate the differences
between analog and digital computers.
Analog computers have a continuous range
of inputs and outputs,
whereas digital only works
with discrete values.
With analog computers,
the quantities of interest
are actually represented
by something physical,
like the amount a wheel has turned.
Whereas digital computers work on symbols
like zeros and ones.
If the answer is, say, two,
there is nothing in the computer
that is 'twice as much' as a one.
In analog computers, there is.
For thousands of years,
people used analog devices
like the Antikythera
mechanism or slide rules,
alongside digital devices like abacuses.
And up until the 1960s,
the most powerful computers on the planet
were actually analog.
Digital computers exploded onto the scene
with the advent of
solid-state transistors.
And now, almost everything is digital.
Most people have never even
heard of analog computers.
But today, that may all be changing.
Moore's Law,
the idea that you can double
the number of transistors
on a chip every two years,
it's reaching its limit,
because transistors are
nearly the same size as atoms.
Simultaneously, advancements
in machine learning
are straining the capabilities
of digital computers.
The solution to these challenges
may well be a new generation
of analog computers.
(soft upbeat music)
- One of the
most important problems
humans have faced for millennia
is predicting the tides.
Napoleon and his men nearly
died crossing the Red Sea
due to a miscalculation
of the rising tide.
And sailors routinely
needed to know the tides
to bring their ships into
port without running aground.
Most coastal locations on earth
experience two high and
two low tides per day,
but their exact timing varies
as does their magnitude.
And this is partly caused by local factors
like the depth of the sea bed
and the shape of the shoreline.
In the late 1700s, to describe
the tidal flow of the oceans,
Pierre-Simon Laplace
derived a set of complicated
differential equations.
They had no analytical solution,
so at that time they
were basically useless.
But in the process of
deriving his equations,
Laplace made a key finding.
Tides are driven
at only a few specific
astronomical frequencies,
including the moon, the sun,
and the eccentricity of the lunar orbit.
Each one of these factors
contributes a sine wave
of a particular amplitude and
phase to the total tide curve.
If someone could figure out
how to correctly combine
these frequency components,
well the tides could finally be predicted.
It took nearly a century.
But in the 1860s,
William Thompson, later Lord
Kelvin, took up the challenge.
Having completed several voyages
to lay the first
transatlantic telegraph cable,
he developed a fascination with the sea.
And subsequently, he threw
his full scientific effort
into measuring and predicting the tides.
Tide gauges at that time used a buoy
to record the height of
the sea onto a paper roll.
Kelvin set out to
determine how sine waves,
with the frequencies
identified by Laplace,
could add together to produce
the observed tidal curve.
The key was to apply the
work of French mathematician,
Joseph Fourier, who had shown
how to decompose any function
into a sum of sine waves.
Most English scientists
were skeptical of the work,
but Thompson was enthralled by it.
His first paper, published at
17, was a defense of Fourier.
While it was straightforward
to apply Fourier's
analysis to tidal curves,
the computation required was enormous.
First, divide the tide curve
up into short time intervals.
And for each interval,
multiply the tide level by a sine wave
with the frequency of interest.
Add up the area of all these rectangles,
and divide by the total time.
And this gives you a single coefficient,
the amplitude of the sine
wave with this frequency.
Then you have to repeat the
process for a cosine function
with the same frequency.
Kelvin found that to make
accurate predictions,
he actually needed 10
different frequency components.
So that is a lot of
multiplication and addition
to characterize the tides
at just one location.
For each additional location,
you have to perform this
analysis all over again.
And this is only half the problem.
Once you have the amplitudes and phases
of the sine functions,
you have to add them up to
predict the future tides.
- Lord Kelvin spent years
analyzing and predicting tides by hand.
Then he had a stroke of inspiration.
Could you design a machine
to carry out these
calculations automatically?
In Kelvin's words to
"substitute brass for brains,"
the resulting analog computers
were in use for nearly a century.
They even played a critical role
in the outcome of World War II.
- Kelvin started
with the problem of prediction,
adding the sine waves together,
given you know their
amplitudes and phases.
He knew he could create sinusoidal motion
with a device called a scotch yoke.
It extracts one dimension
from uniform circular motion.
But to make a tide prediction,
he needed a way to combine
10 sine waves together.
He needed a mechanical
analog for addition.
Stuck on this problem in
1872, Kelvin boarded a train
for a meeting with the main
sponsor of his tidal research,
the British Association.
On the train, Kelvin bumped into a friend,
inventor Beauchamp Tower, to
whom he explained his dilemma.
Towers suggested he used Wheatstone's plan
of a chain passing around
a number of pulleys.
And this was exactly
the addition mechanism
Kelvin was looking for.
By attaching a pulley to each scotch yoke
and running a weighted cord around them,
he could mechanically add
all of their contributions
at once.
He scribbled down the entire plan
for this predictor machine
by the end of the train ride.
He pitched it to the British Association,
and secured funding to build
it all before he returned home.
If you knew the relative contributions
of different frequency components,
Kelvin now had a machine to
automate the tedious task
of predicting future tides.
This was a great leap forward.
Four hours of cranking the handle
yielded a full year of tidal predictions.
But for many years,
the harder half of the problem
was still done by hand,
breaking apart an existing tide curve
into its component frequencies.
To automate this step,
Kelvin needed a machine
capable of multiplying the
tide curve times the sine wave,
and then taking its integral.
What would such a device even look like?
With his older brother, James Thompson,
Kelvin came up with a
mechanical integrator.
It consists of a ball on a rotating disk.
Due to the rotation of the disk,
the further the ball is from the center,
the faster it spins.
If the ball is at the
very center of the disk,
it doesn't turn at all.
And if it's on the left side,
it turns in the opposite direction.
Now the motion of the ball
is converted into an output
via a roller,
which moves a pen up or down
on the output graph paper.
So the way it works
is you trace the function
you want to integrate
with a stylus,
and the stylus controls the
position of the ball on the disk
and hence its speed of rotation.
This is transferred through
the roller to the output,
which plots the integral
of the original function.
Now to decompose a tide curve,
we don't just wanna
integrate the function.
We first wanna multiply it
by a sine wave of a particular frequency.
And the way to do this
is to make the disk rotate back and forth
at that specific frequency.
Now the rotation of the ball
depends not only on
where it is on the disk,
but also on how the disc
is turning at an instant.
You trace the tide curve with the stylus,
which moves the ball back and
forth on the oscillating disk,
and the roller sums up the
integral of the tide curve
times the sine wave.
Simply divide by the total
time to get the coefficient.
Several of these ball and disk integrators
can be connected in parallel
with each disk oscillating
at a different frequency
to calculate the coefficients
for multiple frequency
components at the same time.
Kelvin's analog computers
revolutionized our
ability to predict tides.
Tidal curves from anywhere in the world
could be turned into a set
of sinusoidal coefficients
using the ball and disk harmonic analyzer.
And the resulting sinusoids
could be added together
to predict the future tides
using his scotch yoke pulley machine.
- [Derek] Kelvin's harmonic analyzers
were the basis for a
landmark analog computer
called the differential analyzer,
and his tide predicting machines
were used well into the 1960s.
In fact, they were later overhauled
to include 26 frequency components
and used to plan the
allied invasion on D-Day.
- The Germans
expected any invasion
to come at high tide to minimize the time
Allied soldiers would be
exposed on the beaches.
So they installed millions of obstacles
that would be underwater by mid tide,
many with explosive mines attached.
But the allies spotted the
obstacles and change tack.
Instead, they plan to begin
the invasion at low tide.
This would allow demolition teams
to first clear channels
through the obstacles,
then the main forces could
come through those gaps
as the water rose.
This would also give
landing craft enough time
to depart without getting beached.
The low water times were different
at the five landing
beaches by over an hour,
so the invasion times were staggered
according to the tide predictions.
- This wasn't the only
use of analog computers
in World War II.
Dive bomber aircraft would
plummet out of the sky
directly toward their targets
at up to an 80 degree angle,
and their rapid descents
made them very difficult to shoot down.
So the U.S. began searching for devices
to automatically aim guns at dive bombers.
Most of the proposed solutions
fell into one of two categories.
Some were analog machines
like Lord Kelvin's.
Others were essentially fast calculators.
Mechanical calculating
machines like the abacus
had been around for millennia,
but they were far too slow
to respond to dive bombers.
These new calculating
machines sped things up
by using electrical pulses.
The committee considered
naming these devices
after the pulses they used.
But member George Stibitz
proposed a more general name: digital,
because these machines
operated on numbers themselves
or digits.
And this is the origin of
the term digital computer.
But digital would have to wait.
Of all the proposals and
innovative analog machine
from David Parkinson won out.
At Bell Labs in New York,
Parkinson had been working on a device
to chart telephone data called
an automatic level recorder.
It used a variable resistor
called a potentiometer
to control the motion of a pen.
One night, after hearing reports
of the harrowing allied
evacuation of Dunkirk,
Parkinson had a dream that
he was on the front lines.
(radio tatters)
(mystical music)
(gun firing)
"I found myself in a gun pit
with an anti-aircraft gun crew.
"A gun there was firing occasionally,
"and the impressive
thing was that every shot
"brought down an airplane.
"After three or four shots,
"one of the men in the crew smiled at me
"and beckoned me to
come closer to the gun.
"When I drew near,
"he pointed to the exposed
end of the left trunnion.
"Mounted there was the
control potentiometer
"of my level recorder."
When he woke up, Parkinson realized
the device he was
building to control a pen
could be scaled up to
control an anti-aircraft gun.
He shared this idea with his supervisor,
and after receiving
approval from the military,
they set out to make
Parkinson's dream a reality.
Researchers at Bell Labs
had recently invented an
analog electrical device
called an operational amplifier or op-amp.
It could perform mathematical
operations with voltages,
like addition and multiplication.
They used these op-amps to
create an analog computer
that could solve the ballistics equations
for anti-aircraft guns.
Using radar and optical
sites to obtain the speed,
altitude and direction of enemy planes,
the M9 Gun Director, as
the computer was called,
could rapidly calculate
the correct trajectory
and few setting.
Potentiometers were used
to ascertain the direction
the gun was pointing.
This was not the first
electric analog computer,
but it was an important one.
In World War I, It took an
average of 17,000 rounds
to take down a single airplane.
In 1943, after the invention of the M9,
it took an average of only 90.
During the war, the U.S.
invested big in analog computers.
If you break down their
total military budget,
the third largest single expense
was the development and production
of an incredibly complex
mechanical analog computer
called the Norden bombsight.
Unfortunately, they didn't
get their money's worth.
- Designed by
the eccentric Dutch engineer,
Carl Norden, the Norden
bombsight was built
to enable high precision airborne bombing.
It implemented 64 different
simultaneous algorithms,
including one that compensated
for the rotation of the
earth as the bomb fell.
(bomb exploding)
The Norden was one of the
most closely guarded secrets
of the war.
To prevent the technology
from falling into enemy hands,
American bombardiers carried handguns
specifically to destroy it
in the event of a crash.
But despite its hype and funding,
the Norden didn't work as advertised.
With over 2,000 fine parts,
it required extreme
precision to manufacture.
The problem with analog computers
is that the physical device
is a model for the real world.
So any inaccuracy in the components
translates into inaccuracy
of the computation.
And since there will always be some slop
in the connections between parts,
if you run the same calculation twice,
you won't get the exact same answer.
In the American campaign against Japan,
bomber crews using the bombsite
were unable to destroy critical
Japanese war infrastructure.
And ultimately,
the U.S. abandoned its
precision bombing approach,
and instead blanketed whole
Japanese cities in napalm.
As the war progressed, digital
computers gained traction.
The digital and electronic
Colossus machines
of Bletchley Park in the UK
were critical to breaking German codes.
In the United States,
the military invested
in an enormously complex
and expensive digital
machine, known as ENIAC.
It was designed
to speed up the calculation of
land artillery firing tables.
At the time,
these were computed using
differential analyzers,
the analog mechanical computers
based on Kelvin's harmonic analyzer.
Although not finished until after the war,
ENIAC demonstrated the
power of digital computers.
It's considered by many to
be the first modern computer.
- What really opened the door
to this digital revolution
was the discovery made by Claude Shannon
in his 1936 master's thesis.
He showed that any numerical
operation can be carried out
using the basic building
blocks of Boolean algebra:
Two values, true or false,
also notated as one or zero,
and three operations and, or, and not.
This makes digital computers
the ideal versatile computing machines.
In contrast, each analog computer
is an analog for only one type of problem.
Furthermore, since digital computers
operate on ones and zeros,
they are more resilient
in the face of noise.
It would take a large error
to mistake a one for a zero
or vice versa.
Whereas, even small errors
in analog computers can grow
and ultimately swamp the signal.
So these days, everything is digital.
Our phones, computers,
and internet data centers,
even TV and radio is now
being broadcast as digital.
The advantages are obvious.
Since digital devices operate on symbols,
usually zeros and ones,
they provide exact answers.
And repeat the calculation,
and you get the same result.
They are robust to noise.
Plus, since only a few
components are required
to perform virtually any computation,
those components have been
miniaturized and optimized,
making digital computers
the ideal universal computing machines.
So you would think analog
computers would be long gone,
a relic of the distant past.
But, analog may now be making a comeback.
There are startups actively
working on analog computers.
Why is this happening?
What could be the benefit of analog?
I wanted to put all of
these into one video.
But the story is too good
to bury 20 minutes in,
so that is coming up in part two.
Be sure you're subscribed to the channel
to be notified when that comes out.
(soft upbeat music)
I'll give you a hint about the sequel
in this section of the video,
which is sponsored by Brilliant.
Brilliant is a website and
app that uses interactivity
to help you learn STEM concepts.
For the sequel to this video,
it would be a good idea
to brush up on artificial intelligence,
which you can do with Brilliant's courses
on neural networks.
Here you can analyze
how a neural network
decodes your handwriting.
I also recommend their calculus courses,
which are highly interactive.
What's great about Brilliant
is how it gets you to step through topics,
answering questions as you go.
In that way, you can't trick yourself
into thinking you already
understand everything,
because you're constantly
putting your knowledge
to the test.
Personally, I find their
courses challenging,
which they should be in order
for you to learn anything.
But if you ever get stuck,
there's always a helpful
hint close at hand,
and more in-depth
explanations are available
if you want them.
As the holiday season is upon us,
an annual subscription to Brilliant
makes an awesome gift for any
curious learners in your life.
And whether it's for you or someone else,
Brilliant is offering 20%
off an annual subscription
to the first 200 people to sign up.
Just go to brilliant.org/veritasium.
I'll put that link down
into the description.
So I wanna thank Brilliant
for supporting Veritasium,
and I wanna thank you for watching.